nouns
	place/things

pronouns
	take place of nouns - I/his/she/they

adjectives
	modify noun or pronoun (e.g. talented, modern, best)


verbs
	action

adverbs
	modify verbs or other adverbs (ly)

Prepositions
	show relationships
	condition, direction, location or time
	e.g. behind, on, in spite of, across, with

Conjunctions
	join words, phrases and clauses
	coordinating, correlative, adverbial, subordinative
	coordinating -- fanboys (for, and, nor, but, or, yet, so)
	corelative - comparisons, e.g. not only but also, either nor, either or, whether or, both and
	adverbial conjunction - hot (however, otherwise, therefor), shot (similarly, hence, on the other hand, thus), cat (consequently, also, then).
			Other adverbial conjections are: in addition, accordingly, in contrast, more over, in fact
	subordinate conjection - change/subboridnate one sentence to another, e.g. as, because, since, although, whereas, even though, while


Interjections
	show emotion or surprise, e.g. duh!, huh!, wow!, ouch!, hey!, ugh!


Parts of speech
	Subject & Verb (e.g. The seals performed) use action verbs.
	subject pronouns - I/his/you/he
	indefinite pronouns - everyone, anyone, each, somebody, anybody

Three types of verbs
	action verbs (dramatic), e.g. leaped, barked, napped, sniffed, played
		just add ed for past, e.g. I asked, I had (past participle)
	linking verbs - link noun to subject, pronoun to subject, adjective to subject, or preposition. Such as feel, look, sound, smell, taste, seem, appear, remain, grow, e.g. his father was a colonel
		he felt ill
	helping verbs - appear before the main verb, e.g. can, will, might, e.g she can balance on the slake line
		
	iregular verb - present, past and past participle are different buy/bought, choose/chose/chosen

Subject and verb need to agree, e.g. singular/plural, same tenses (either present or past)
	active voice -- subject is clearly responsible for verb


Clause - a group of related words containing a subject and verb
	Independent clause (complete idea) -- stand on its own, e.g. The tutor discussed the paper with the student.
	Subbordinate/Dependent clause (incomplete idea), e.g. Once I find the axe; Although you lost the keys
		Adjective subbordinate clause - modify a noun in a sentence. They generally start with
			who, whom, that, which, whose, when, where, e.g.
			Lyida, who was an expert climber, needed less coaching than Ava.
		Adverb subbordinate clause - modify verbs, ajectives and possibly other adverbs
			They include: how, when, where, under which condition, what is happening to someone
			They begin with: because, since, after, while, when, although
			e.g. After she finsihed the interview, Emma felt releived.

Phrase - A word or group of related words lacking a subject and verb
	Two or more words
	Noun phrases
		contains nouns
		three types:
			prepositional phrases
				contains preposition and at lease one noun, e.g. From my vantage point, I can see two eagles.
				"From my vantage point" is prepositional phrase
			absolute phrases
				modify entire sentence and they can be in begging, middle or end and good for adding details
				e.g. Feet rooted to the spot, the hunter listened for sounds of movement in the forest.
				"Feet rooted to the spot" is absolute phrase
			appositive phrases
				adds details to noun, modifies only noun, e.g.
				His car, a rusty 1982 Ford Mustang, chugged down the road like an old mule.
				"a rusty 1982 Ford Mustang" is appositive phrase
	Verb phrases
		typically begin with verb
		infinitive phrases
			to + verb, e.g. to swim
			e.g. To swim the length of the pool under water, he had to hold his breath for two full minutes.
			"to swith the length of the pool under water" is infinitive phrase.
			It is useful when making a plea that something needs to happen
		participle phrases
			present participle - begins with verb+ing
				e.g. running out of time, she wrote the first word that came to mind.
			past participle - typically ends with -ed
				Exhaused by the long day of rowing, he fell asleep immediately.

Four types of sentences:
	Simple sentences
		contains only one independent clause - complete ida (single subject, single verb)
		You can use conjunction, semicolon or semicolon and adverbial conjunction

		e.g. The roses grew quickly in the wet, fertile soil.
		e.g. Peacock boulevard, a deserted stretch of abondoned storefronts, waited paitiently for new life.
		e.g. Rushing by wildly, the river, swollen with the rain water, threatened to flood the village.

	Compound sentences
		When you join two independent sentences
		e.g. The old car spluttered to the top of the hill, so we were all relieved.
		In above example, "so" is coordinating conjunction and put comma before so
		e.g. The old car spluttered to the top of the hill; we were all relieved.
		e.g. The old car spluttered to the top of the hill; therefore, we were all relived.
		In above example, we used semicolon with adverbial conjunction and "therefore" is adverbial conjunction
		e.g. Eyes burning from staring at the computer screen, the writer smiled, for he had finished.

	Complex Sentences
		Combine independent clause with dependent clause
		You can use adverbial conjunction where subordinate clause precede independent clause.
		e.g. Because the stinger is lodged under your skin, you will experience pain for about an hour.
		Although you are young, you can stay up late.

	Compound-Complex Sentences
		Two indpendent clauses and a dependent clause
		You can combine compound clause with conjunction that combines with dependent clause
		e.g. We could go to the beach, or we could go up to the mountains since it mightr rain on the coast.
		In above example, first two clauses are independent and "since it might rain on the coast" is dependent.
		e.g. Because the stinger is lodged under your skin, you will experience pain for about an hour, yet the 
		pain will subside gradually.
		In above example, "because.." is dependent and "you will.." and "yet..." are independent clauses.
		Pick up the trash, and you can have some ice cream when you come inside.


Three parts of paragraph:
	Topic sentence
		it tells what paragraph is about
		e.g. People need supportive relationships to ensure mental and physical health.
	Supporting Details
		It convince the reader,e .g.
		give an example of family relationships, work relationships
	Concluding Sentence
		It provides summary, e.g.
		Mental and physical health go together, so people need to make it a priority to find and maintain
			supportive relationships.

	
Five stages of writing
	Inventing
		Freewriting, brainstorming, journalistic questions, listing, clustering
	Organizing
		Arrange material, e.g.
		compare/contrast
		cause/effect
		division/classification
		process analysis
		illustration
	Drafting
		You just trying to get information on page without regard to grammer, spelling
	Revising
		Two steps - macro revision, micro revision
		Macro revision looks at organization and contents
		Micro revision looks at sentences
		Keep readers in mind
		You may go back to organization/drafting
	Editing
		Do this last
		spelling/punctuation/grammer


Editing
	Subject-verb agreement
		Plural subject require plural verb
	Pronoun-Antecedent agreement
		Antecedent is a word that pronoun refers, e.g.
		The student lost their notebook. is incorrect and instead we need to use his/her notebook. "student" is
		antecdent.
		Avoid slang
	Parallel structure
		same format, e.g. if you are using ing, then use that for all verbs
		For excercise, Tara liked snowboarding, surfing, and running.

	Punctuation
		commas
			commas with introductory elements
			First of all, I like to go to the movies, the beach, and the mountains, so I need a car.
			Introductory words should be separated by comma (e.g. subbordinate clause)
			commas in a series
			commas in a compound sentence
			comma splice
				Two independent clauses join by comma
			e.g. 
				On the other hand, you might consider yoga, but meditation is also an option.
		apostrophes
			mark possession and contraction
			We found Hank's hammer. (shows posession apostrophe)
			I can't make it. (contraction)
		semicolon
			Separate two complete sentences/clauses
		
	Capitalization
		always capitalize "I"
		The first word of a sentene.
		Capitalize proper nouns.

	Spelling
		homonyms/commonly confused words (two, too, to)
		
